<h1>Cluster analysis of Plasmodium RNA-seq time-course data identifies stage-specific co-regulated biological processes and regulatory elements</h1>

In this study, we interpreted RNA-seq time-course data of three developmental stages of Plasmodium species by clustering genes based on similarities in their expression profile without prior knowledge of the gene function. Functional enrichment of clusters of upregulated genes at specific time-points reveals potential targetable biological processes with information on their timings. We identified common consensus sequences that these clusters shared as potential points of coordinated transcriptional control. Five cluster groups showed upregulated profile patterns of biological interest. This included two clusters from the Intraerythrocytic Developmental Cycle (cluster 4 = 16 genes, and cluster 9 = 32 genes), one from the sexual development stage (cluster 2 = 851 genes), and two from the gamete-fertilization stage in the mosquito host (cluster 4 = 153 genes, and cluster 9 = 258 genes). The IDC expressed the least numbers of genes with only 1448 genes showing any significant activity of the 5020 genes (~29%) in the experiment. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of these clusters revealed a total of 671 uncharacterized genes implicated in 14 biological processes and components associated with these stages, some of which are currently being investigated as drug targets in on-going research. Five putative transcription regulatory binding motifs shared by members of each cluster were also identified, one of which was also identified in a previous study by separate researchers. Our study shows stage-specific genes and biological processes that may be important in antimalarial drug research efforts. In addition, timed-coordinated control of separate processes may explain the paucity of factors in parasites.

SUPPLEMENTARY DATA INFORMATION
<ol>
<li>S01a: Significant (p < 0.05) Gene-Ontology biological process and components in enriched in gene clusters of biological interest of the IDC stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S01b: Significant (p < 0.05) Gene-Ontology biological process and components in enriched in gene clusters of biological interest of the SEX stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S01c: Significant (p < 0.05) Gene-Ontology biological process and components in enriched in gene clusters of biological interest of the MOS stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S02a: List of highly conserved genes with unknown function found in clusters of biological interest identified in the IDC stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S02b: List of highly conserved genes with unknown function found in clusters of biological interest identified in the SEX developmental stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S02c: List of highly conserved genes with unknown function found in clusters of biological interest identified in the MOS developmental stage of Plasmodium berghei respectively (.csv).</li>
<li>S03a: Expression and median profile trends of significant genes (p < 0.05) of the IDC developmental stage of Plasmodium berghei (.png).</li>
<li>S03b: Expression and median profile trends of significant genes (p < 0.05) of the SEX developmental stage of Plasmodium berghei (.png).</li>
<li>S03c: Expression and median profile trends of significant genes (p < 0.05) of the MOS developmental stage of Plasmodium berghei (.png).</li>
<li>S03d: Expression and median profile trends of significant genes (p < 0.05) between 0 and 42 hours in the Plasmodium berghei (.png).</li>
</ol>
